
1. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2004 Jun;7(2):117-23. Epub 2004 Jan 23.

A double-blind, placebo controlled, cross-over trial of adjunctive donepezil for 
cognitive impairment in schizophrenia.

Tuğal O(1), Yazici KM, Anil Yağcioğlu AE, Göğüş A.

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, Ankara,
Turkey.

Although there have been several case reports suggesting the beneficial effect of
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors in the cognitive deficits seen in schizophrenia, 
controlled studies have revealed contradictory results. The aim of this study was
to investigate if donepezil could improve cognitive functions in schizophrenia.
Twelve schizophrenic patients, who were diagnosed according to DSM-IV criteria
and who had been on a stable dose of a high-potency typical antipsychotic for a
minimum period of 3 months, participated in this 12-wk double-blind, placebo
controlled, cross-over study of donepezil adjunctive treatment. Patients were
randomly assigned under double-blind conditions to receive 5 mg/d donepezil or
placebo for 6 wk, and then were crossed over to the alternate condition for 6
additional weeks. At baseline, 6 and 12 wk, patients were evaluated with the
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), Calgary Depression Scale, the
Wechsler Memory Scale Revised (WMS-R), a test for Verbal Fluency, Trail Making
Test, Parts A and B, and Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST). Treatment effect was
not significant in any of the cognitive measures. There were also no significant 
changes in the PANSS and depression scores. Nicotinic receptor desensitization
may cause non-responsiveness to acetylcholine as previously suggested, but the
most likely explanation appears to be that defects in other neurotransmitter
systems account for the cognitive deficits seen in schizophrenic patients.

PMID: 14741060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

